



IAB                                                        M. Nottingham
Internet-Draft
Intended status: Informational                               B. Trammell
Expires: May 8, 2019                                    November 4, 2018


                         Internet Choke Points
                      draft-iab-chokepoints-latest

Abstract

   This memo discusses points of control on the Internet, or "choke
   points", that may have architectural impact.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on May 8, 2019.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2018 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (https://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of
   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.






Nottingham & Trammell      Expires May 8, 2019                  [Page 1]

Internet-Draft            Internet Choke Points            November 2018


Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
   2.  Choke Points on the Internet  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   2
     2.1.  More than Resilience  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   3.  Identifying Potential Choke Points  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   4.  Techniques for Managing Potential Choke Points  . . . . . . .   4
     4.1.  Avoiding Choke Points . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.2.  Balancing Interests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.3.  Multi-Stakeholder Administration  . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     4.4.  External Regulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
     5.1.  URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6

1.  Introduction

   Recent events have caused concern about control of access to the
   Internet, leading one infrastructure company's CEO to reportedly
   assert:

      Literally, I woke up in a bad mood and decided someone shouldn't
      be allowed on the Internet.  No one should have that power.

   In fact, the Internet is both architected and administered to
   preclude any one entity from having this power, through the careful
   management of "choke points" where such power could be exercised.

2.  Choke Points on the Internet

   A large influence on the architecture of the Internet was a need to
   survive nuclear attack [1], so that loss of no one link or node would
   preclude communication overall.  Although in some places Internet
   access is at risk - especially when there is not adequate diversity
   of access available - the Internet as a whole has proven resilient in
   the face of such physical disruptions.

   This desire for resilience is reflected in the modern Internet
   through measures like the duplication of submarine internet links
   [2].

   However, it is not limited to the physical components of the
   Internet; it also extends to the various services that Internet
   access depends upon, and the protocols that it uses.  For example,
   there are multiple DNS root servers [3], operated by a number of
   parties.






Nottingham & Trammell      Expires May 8, 2019                  [Page 2]

Internet-Draft            Internet Choke Points            November 2018


   When any one component - through its design or the constraints upon
   its use - has the ability to deny access to the Internet
   (accidentally or not) or control its use, we call this a choke point.

   Avoiding choke points is both a design goal for both the protocols
   and the services that make network access and operations possible, as
   well as an assumption made by each layer and service about its
   dependencies.  The resilience and long-term health of the Internet
   depends on this assumption.

   This does not mean that we can prevent all possible choke points; if
   a node has only one connection to the Internet, that link will be
   able to deny access no matter what measures we take.  Instead, our
   aim is to avoid unnecessary choke points, especially when they can
   influence large portions of the Internet.

2.1.  More than Resilience

   As John Gilmore said, "the internet interprets censorship as damage
   and routes around it."  Censorship and other forms of control relies
   on having an opportunity to exercise that control.  Limiting the
   number of choke points and assuring that any unavoidable points are
   appropriately administered allows this valuable architectural
   property to persist.

   This emergent property of the Internet has proven to be one of its
   core features.  By providing resilient communication, it also
   provides

   At the same time, the Internet's composition as a network of
   independent networks is valuable; imposing unnecessary constraints
   upon them is to be avoided.  However, this does not mean that
   internet infrastructure providers are without guidance; in particular
   we note that the UN's Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights
   [4] is an already-existing framework for businesses (including
   Internet infrastructure providers) to make such decisions within
   while still respecting human rights - including the right to Internet
   access.

3.  Identifying Potential Choke Points

   new protocols and protocol extensions

   existing protocols







Nottingham & Trammell      Expires May 8, 2019                  [Page 3]

Internet-Draft            Internet Choke Points            November 2018


4.  Techniques for Managing Potential Choke Points

   There are some cases when there is an unavoidable choke point.  For
   example, as the source of truth regarding naming, administration of
   domain names is currently a necessary choke point in the Internet
   architecture.

4.1.  Avoiding Choke Points

   A choke point can often be avoided through good protocol design.

   o  distributed

   o  avoid discriminators

   o  avoid adding new roles

4.2.  Balancing Interests

   o  create balanced markets

   o  standards

   o  federated systems

   For example, Content Delivery Networks (CDNs) are sometimes viewed as
   another emerging choke point, because they are seen as essential in
   mitigating Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attacks.  While there
   appears to be a healthy market of CDNs (and similar services) and the
   costs of using one have been driven down considerably over the years,
   some suggest that there is a risk of a choke point forming - as there
   is wherever a function is critical to the Internet's operation.

4.3.  Multi-Stakeholder Administration

   Another technique for mitigating an unavoidable choke point is
   through formal delegation of its administration to multiple parties
   with balanced interests, often referred to as the Multi-Stakeholder
   Model [5].

   For example, in the case of domain names such oversight is performed
   by ICANN, a multi-stakeholder organisation.

   Similarly, the specifications that describe the Internet and the Web
   form another potential choke point, since they mediate how most
   people use the Internet.  For these, standardization is overseen by
   the World Wide Web consortium and the IETF, both of whom subscribe to
   open standards principles [6].



Nottingham & Trammell      Expires May 8, 2019                  [Page 4]

Internet-Draft            Internet Choke Points            November 2018


   Together, these architectural principles and corresponding practices
   assure that no one person, business or government can control the
   entire Internet.

4.4.  External Regulation

   Another possible way to counter the ill effects of a choke point is
   through legal means, for example regulation.  While it may be
   appropriate as a solution - especially when a monopoly forms - the
   effect of regulation on the architecture need to be evaluated
   carefully.

   For example, near-monopolies on "last-mile" Internet access in some
   jurisdictions have led to concerns about network neutrality [7],
   since they act as a choke point.

   Historically, the Internet has worked best as a network-of-networks,
   where each has administrative control to make decisions about local
   connectivity.  Imposing external constraints on how networks select
   their members and who they communicate with could have far-reaching
   effects, especially since they are often already subject to a variety
   of local laws and regulations.

   Ensuring that choke points don't form is preferable to enshrining
   them in regulation, since they introduce not only points of control,
   but also increase the risk of failure in that component, concentrate
   the risk of security vulnerabilities there, and can ultimately limit
   the scale of the Internet.

   Therefore, when there is risk of a choke point forming, we look for
   other mitigations before considering constraints on the behaviour of
   infrastructure providers.  This might take place through encouraging
   more diversity at the potential choke point, technical measures that
   counteract its formation, or other means.

5.  References

5.1.  URIs

   [1] https://www.rand.org/content/dam/rand/pubs/papers/2008/P1995.pdf

   [2] https://submarine-cable-map-2018.telegeography.com

   [3] http://root-servers.org/

   [4] http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/Publications/
       GuidingPrinciplesBusinessHR_EN.pdf




Nottingham & Trammell      Expires May 8, 2019                  [Page 5]

Internet-Draft            Internet Choke Points            November 2018


   [5] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multistakeholder_governance_model

   [6] https://open-stand.org/infographic-the-benefits-of-open-
       standards/

   [7] http://www.internetsociety.org/net-neutrality

Authors' Addresses

   Mark Nottingham

   Email: mnot@mnot.net
   URI:   https://www.mnot.net/


   Brian Trammell

   Email: ietf@trammell.ch

































Nottingham & Trammell      Expires May 8, 2019                  [Page 6]
